how-to: add stage outputs existing in the WS but missing from dvc.yaml (#1840)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/command-reference/commit.md

The `dvc commit` command is useful for several scenarios, when data already
tracked by DVC changes: when a [stage](/doc/command-reference/run) or
[pipeline](/doc/command-reference/dag) is in development/experimentation; to

> force-updating the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files without reproducing stages or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
force-update the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files without reproducing stages or
```

pipelines; or when DVC <abbr>outputs</abbr> are added to a stage, manually

> generated, or edited. These scenarios are further detailed below.

Reviewer: > when DVC <abbr>outputs</abbr> are added to a stage, manually generated, or edited

I don't even know what we were trying to say here, actually :/ Please go over this phrasing again, it should be simple language that makes sense, not a riddle that readers will just shrug off/ignore/skip. Just a general statement that doesn't have all the details is better here, since it will be explained in detail below in the bullets. No need to force a complete explanation in a single sentence, try to make it general yet correct.

Author: Have updated this. Tried to make it simpler and more general.

The `dvc commit` command is useful for several scenarios, when data already
tracked by DVC changes: when a [stage](/doc/command-reference/run) or
[pipeline](/doc/command-reference/dag) is in development/experimentation; to
force-update the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files without reproducing stages or

> pipelines; or to add missing outputs or manually execute a stage. These

Reviewer: > or to add missing outputs or manually execute a stage.

Yes, definitely simpler which is good. But this is still 2 separate things (so should use a comma, removing a coma is not = merging). This should be something like "or to mark existing files/dirs as stage outputs" — a single generalization that covers the last 2 bullets.

Also, `abbr` is needed around "outputs".

Author: Done.

The `dvc commit` command is useful for several scenarios, when data already
tracked by DVC changes: when a [stage](/doc/command-reference/run) or
[pipeline](/doc/command-reference/dag) is in development/experimentation; when
force updating the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files without reproducing stages or
pipelines; when adding already existing <abbr>outputs</abbr> to a stage that
missing from `dvc.yaml`; or when manually editing or generating DVC outputs.

> These scenarios are further detailed below.

Reviewer: OK to reorder these but adding another sentence here is TMI. It's already a very long/hard-to-read paragraph. Let's merge the 2 last cases as s single sentence similar to the original version. BTW please don't remove `<abbr>` tags unless there's a reason. Those make tooltips on the website:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1477535/96513990-a4ee3b00-1228-11eb-8197-0bc0718125cb.png)
> https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference/commit

Reviewer: I still see the new separate sentence there, BTW. Let's merge those last 2 sentences before "These scenarios..." somehow please.

The `dvc commit` command is useful for several scenarios, when data already
tracked by DVC changes: when a [stage](/doc/command-reference/run) or

> [pipeline](/doc/command-reference/dag) is in development/experimentation; when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[pipeline](/doc/command-reference/dag) is in development/experimentation; to
```

> force updating the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files without reproducing stages or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
force-updating the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files without reproducing stages or
```

pipelines; or when DVC <abbr>outputs</abbr> are added to a stage, manually

> generated or edited. These scenarios are further detailed below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generated, or edited. These scenarios are further detailed below.
```

> adding them to a stage. These scenarios are further detailed below.

Reviewer: > or when manually editing or generating DVC <abbr>outputs</abbr> or
adding them to a stage

To many "or"s and the order is inverted compared to the bullet list below. But let's combine them conceptually. Generalize. Basically you just removed the comma so far 🙂  How can you describe all the cases of the last sentence in a single statement? Should be possible, I think.

Author: Tried combine the last point in same sentence in the latest update. Please check.

- It's always possible to manually execute the source code used in a stage
  without DVC (outputs must be unprotected or removed first in certain cases,
  see `dvc unprotect`). We can also
  [add outputs to an existing stage](/docs/user-guide/how-to/add-output-to-stage)
  without executing it again. Once a desirable result is reached, use `dvc add`
  or `dvc commit` as appropriate to update the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files and

>   store changed data to the cache.

Reviewer: Let's use 2 bullets. The existing one is having run a command without DVC and later wrapping the results with a dvc.yaml file. BTW this one should be the last bullet and could use some improvement in it's explanation e.g. it's not necessarily about source code, it could be a binary, etc. (maybe use the term "terminal command")...

The new one is about having run a stage with DVC (either writing dvc.yaml manually and using `repro`, or with `run`) but later noticing dvc.yaml is incomplete, missing one+ output(s) — which already exist in the workspace, so no need to re-execute the command here either.

So as you can see there's lots of subtleties here and we need to express everything in the docs as clearly and briefly as possible (difficult balance).

  reproduce the whole pipeline. If you're sure no pipeline results would change,
  use `dvc commit` to force update the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files and cache.

> - In some situations we have executed a stage (either by writing `dvc.yaml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In cases where we have previously executed a stage (either by writing `dvc.yaml`
```

Reviewer: > stage commands

Commands? There's just one command per stage.

  `dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later
  notice that some of the output files or directories it creates, which are

>   already in the workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). We can

Reviewer: `abbr` aroud "workspace"?

>   the workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). We can

Reviewer: Why not just use the exact same text we have previously reviewed and agreed upon? As requested in https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/1840#pullrequestreview-512176615:

`that some of the output files or directories it creates, which are already in the <abbr>workspace</abbr>`

  [add missing outputs to an existing stage](/docs/user-guide/how-to/add-output-to-stage)
  without having to execute it again. Use `dvc commit` to update the `dvc.lock`
  file and save outputs to the cache.

> - It's always possible to manually execute the terminal command or source code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It's always possible to manually execute the command or source code
```

Reviewer: Please commit and fix formatting.

  used in a stage without DVC (outputs must be unprotected or removed first in

>   certain cases, see `dvc unprotect`). Once a desirable result is reached, use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  certain cases, see `dvc unprotect`). Once the desired result is reached, use
```

>   `dvc commit` as appropriate to update the `dvc.lock` file(s) and store changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `dvc commit` to update the `dvc.lock` file(s) and store changed
```

Reviewer: Needs formatting

>   files and store changed data to the cache.

Reviewer: So actually this seems wrong. `dvc add` and `.dvc` files don't seem to have anything to do with this case. We're talking about stage commands so only commit and dvc.lock apply here. Please update

p.s. I know this text was there, before but since already we moved it around, let's also fix this up please.

Reviewer: Maybe just ``... use `dvc commit` to update the `dvc.lock` file(s) and ...``

Author: Done.

  reproduce the whole pipeline. If you're sure no pipeline results would change,
  use `dvc commit` to force update the `dvc.lock` or `.dvc` files and cache.

- Sometimes we have executed a stage (either by writing `dvc.yaml` manually and
  using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), and later notice that output(s) which

>   already exist in workspace are missing in `dvc.yaml`. We can

Reviewer: Good but I wouldn't start with "Sometimes" again same as the previous bullet (minor), and please apply the same changes you do to the paragraph in content/docs/user-guide/how-to/add-output-to-stage.md per the recent comments on files vs. outputs I left there. Thanks

Reviewer: and please apply the same changes you do to the paragraph in content/docs/user-guide/how-to/add-output-to-stage.md

Reviewer: Still pending... Will comment again.

still useful, but keep in mind that DVC can't guarantee reproducibility in those
cases.

We can [add outputs to a stage](/docs/user-guide/how-to/add-output-to-stage)
without re-running it, and `dvc commit` is used to save the newly specified
output to the cache and update `dvc.lock`.

> 

Reviewer: Looks like we're just appending the notes to the end of the Description. Let's read and understanding the context first to find the best place and manner to insert this info. Hint: there's actually a bullet list of scenarios to use this command in this ref.

Reviewer: The explanation is missing a key piece of info: it's about EXISTING stages (that have already been executed). Let's also use the term "execute" instead of "run" here BTW, please. Also, no need to explain what commit does since that is explained in detail in this reference. Again, let's try to understand the context, read the doc, and make sure the text being inserted makes sense when reading it as a whole.

not saved in the cache. This is where the `dvc commit` command comes into play.
It performs that last step (saving the data in cache).

> Note that it's best to avoid the last three scenarios. They essentially

Reviewer: Good catch! Glad you're reading the whole context now 🙂

not saved in the cache. This is where the `dvc commit` command comes into play.
It performs that last step (saving the data in cache).

> Note that it's best to avoid the last three scenarios. They essentially

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that it's best to avoid the last two scenarios. They essentially
```
